---
title: Sexism in American Time Capsules
subtitle: The Future of Men
date: 2020-06-20
layout: episode
og-description: ""
og-image: "https://www.sweetpotatosociology.com/assets/images/episodes/2.png"
---

<article>

[[toc]]

<main>

# Sexism in American Time Capsules: The Future of Men

<div class="video-wrapper">
  <iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/hBrTnA7y46M" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

## Sources

 1. Bailer-Jones, Coryn A. L., and Davide Farnocchia. 2019. “Future Stellar Flybys of the Voyager and Pioneer Spacecraft.” Research Notes of the AAS 3(4):59. doi: 10.3847/2515-5172/ab158e. [http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.03503]()
 2. Berkeley Barb. 1972. “The Berkeley Barb: Vol. 14, No. 9, Issue 342, March 3 - 9, 1972.” [https://voices.revealdigital.org/?a=d&d=BFBJFGD19720303&e=-------en-20--1--txt-txIN---------------1]()
 3. Dwayne Brown and Jia-Rui Cook. 2011. “NASA Invites Public To Take A Journey Toward Interstellar Space.” [https://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2011/apr/HQ_M11-084_Voyager_Update.txt]()
 4. Goldstein, Natalie. 2009. *Global Warming*. New York: Facts On File.
 5. Jacobs, Thornwell. 1945. *Step Down, Dr. Jacobs: The Autobiography of an Autocrat*. 1st ed. Atlanta, Georgia: Westminster Publishers. [https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=mdp.39015076349425]()
 6. James Joseph O’Toole. 2017. “Futurology.” Encyclopedia Britannica. [https://www.britannica.com/topic/futurology]()
 7. Lee Madden. 1967. *1999 A.D.* [https://www.filmpreservation.org/sponsored-films/screening-room/1999-a-d#]()
 8. Leila J. Rupp. 1992. “Eleanor Flexner’s Century of Struggle: Women’s History and the Women’s Movement.” NWSA Journal 4(2):157–69. [https://www.jstor.org/stable/4316194]()
 9. NASA. 1969. “Apollo 11 Goodwill Messages.” [https://history.nasa.gov/ap11-35ann/goodwill/Apollo_11_material.pdf]()
 10. NASA. 2007. “Pioneer-10 and Pioneer-11.” [https://www.nasa.gov/centers/ames/missions/archive/pioneer10-11.html]()
 11. Netherlands Bureau for Tourism and Congresses. 2019. “The Royal Family.” [https://www.holland.com/global/tourism/information/general/the-royal-family.htm]()
 12. Nicholas Hartley. 2015. “The Westinghouse Time Capsule.” Western Pennsylvania History 98(3):6–8. [https://journals.psu.edu/wph/article/view/60182/60314]()
 13. Oglethorpe University. 2016. “Crypt of Civilization: History.” [https://crypt.oglethorpe.edu/history/]()
 14. Ozma Records. n.d. “Voyager Golden Record.” [https://ozmarecords.com/pages/voyager]()
 15. Panasonic Corporation. 2010. “The Official Record of Time Capsule Expo ’70: Selection and Collection of the Contents.” [https://panasonic.net/history/timecapsule/1/Selection_and_Collection_of_the_Contents.html]()
 16. Rose Eveleth. 2015. “Why Aren’t There More Women Futurists?” [https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/07/futurism-sexism-men/400097/]()
 17. Sagan, Carl, and Jerome Agel. 1989. The Cosmic Connection. New York: Anchor Books.
 18. Timothy Ferris. 2017. “How the Voyager Golden Record Was Made.” [https://www.newyorker.com/tech/annals-of-technology/voyager-golden-record-40th-anniversary-timothy-ferris]()
 19. Westinghouse Electric & Manufacturing Company. 1938. *Book of Record of the Time Capsule of Cupaloy.* [https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Book_of_Record_of_the_Time_Capsule_of_Cupaloy]()
 20. Wolverton, Mark. 2004. *The Depths of Space: The Story of the Pioneer Planetary Probes.* Washington, D.C: Joseph Henry Press.

## Script
### Introduction - *Pioneer*
One of the last remnants of humanity will be the *Pioneer* space probe. In about 2 million years, *Pioneer 10* will pass by Aldebaran, the eye of the constellation Taurus<sup>[10](#anon-6)</sup>, which is coincidentally the same amount of time that it will take marine animals and coral to recover after acidification due to global warming, way to go humanity.<sup>[4, p. 53 ](#anon-6)</sup>

This is what Aldebaranians are getting at the end of this journey mega-annums in the making: a six by nine plaque designed chiefly by Carl Sagan, the turtleneck-wearing public astronomer and television personality we all know and love.<sup>[17, Ch. 3](#)</sup> On it, there’s a hydrogen atom, pulsars indicating Earth’s place in the universe, and *Pioneer*’s trajectory; lots of good science.

Something else got a disproportionate amount of the public’s attention, though. It’s those damn Orange County nudists on the right<sup>[2, cover](#)</sup>. Many folks apparently couldn’t handle aliens seeing us in the buff. According to Sagan, both the Chicago *Sun-Times* and the Philadelphia *Inquirer* censored dicks and were not fans of free the nipple. Other newspapers got copious amounts of flack for publishing the unrated version. One irate reader lamented that “our own space agency officials have found it necessary to spread this filth even beyond our own solar system."<sup>[17, Ch. 4](#)</sup>

American Puritanism manifested in a much sneakier way, however. In Sagan’s reflections on the three-week process (yes, less than a month for a plaque that’ll probably be around for approximately 100 quintillion years<sup>[1, pg. 4](#)</sup>), he mentions how he was hesitant to include a tiny vertical line on the mons pubis indicating the vulva, fearing pushback by NASA that supposedly never occurred. Other evidence suggests that John Naugle, later NASA’s Chief Scientist, approved the original design with the tweak of removing the offending line.<sup>[20, pg. 80](#)</sup> The *Pioneer* woman’s pose is also curious. Her hip dip and lack of movement imply a passivity compared to the man on her left.

Aside from the concerning fact that the public questioned non-sexual nudity in the first place, NASA censored the vulva on the body intended to represent womanhood far after we’re gone. Although Ann Druyan, Sagan’s wife, penned the nude interstellar *American Gothic*, NASA didn’t consult any other women in the entire affair. It was up to the NASA patriarchy to portray women for the rest of the universe.

### Overview
The *Pioneer* missions weren’t the only instances when women ended up misrepresented for all eternity. A handful of time capsules exist containing cultural artifacts and information designed to survive for at least millennia. Besides the *Pioneer* plaque, long-lasting American-made capsules include the:

 - Apollo 11 Goodwill Messages
 - Crypt of Civilization
 - *Voyager* Golden Record
 - and the Westinghouse Time Capsules

### Lack of Representation
The most common misrepresentation that these projects suffer from is not necessarily blatant sexism, but its just as toxic counterpart: erasure.

The Apollo 11 Goodwill Messages intended to document the moon-landing with writings penned by Earth’s VIPs. This quarter-sized disc contains the words from four of then living presidents and the leaders of 73 countries.

The 38-page document mentions women three times. Two wrote messages, and both were queens: Juliana of the Netherlands and Elizabeth Ⅱ. They, along with the other 71 patriarchs, included notes representing their countries. The third is Representative Margaret Chase Smith, a member of the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that advised NASA on this project.<sup>[9](#)</sup>

That leaves NASA with three women in on the lunar tombstone discussion. The two queens are figureheads, so it’s tough to determine how much influence they had in the message at all.<sup>[11](#)</sup> Chase was the only woman pages out of pages of other men that helped get this project *off the ground*.

At least NASA wasn’t as bad as Dr. Thornwell Jacobs, who spearheaded the Crypt of Civilization project. This time capsule was the first successful modern one of its kind. It consists of a 20 ⨉ 10 ⨉ 10 foot room covered in stone, porcelain enamel plates, and pitch, chock full of media and objects.<sup>[13](#)</sup>

Dr. Jacobs’s dramatically titled autobiography *Step Down, Dr. Jacobs* is an absolute unit, stretching over 1000 pages. He details his life and work and includes related press and letters. Jacobs also dedicates a 43-page chapter to the Crypt.

I couldn’t find any women involved in the project mentioned by Jacobs. To his credit, he includes another dramatically titled article in *Step Down* by the Crypt’s chief archivist, T.K. Peters, “The Preservation of This Dynamic Epoch.” Within this piece, he prints a 36 item list of Crypt contents that includes men and women in a couple of points. Jacobs defaults to patriarchal Western high society and science.<sup>[5, pg. 895-897](#)</sup> In other words, because the arts and sciences at the time were even more patriarchal than they are now, women were de facto left out of the conversation. At least the team included a “complete set of women’s clothing.”

### Blatant Sexism

Don’t worry: there are also more blatant forms of sexism integrated into these projects. The *Voyager* Golden Record is an audiovisual record containing sights and sounds created to represent Earth and humanity. A copy was aboard both the interstellar *Voyager 1* and *Voyager 2* probes constructed to last about as long as the *Pioneer* spacecraft mentioned earlier.

Sagan returned to form another committee that chose 27 musical tracks for the ultimate cosmic mixtape. Despite there being comparatively more women on *Voyager*’s core team, including Ann Druyan, Creative Director, and Linda Salzman Sagan, recorder of the disc’s spoken word sections, only five out of the 27 final tracks had evident female involvement, and female composers don’t appear in the liner notes.<sup>[3](#), [18](#)</sup> Granted, many of the tracks were folk songs sourced by ethnomusicologists who often found it challenging to pinpoint a source. Regardless, even this more gender diverse team managed to disproportionately represented male composers. There is no excuse for three Bach tracks on a record meant to represent all of humanity!

I saved the best for last. The Westinghouse Time Capsules are two time capsules buried in Queens, imbued with a similar mission to all the other capsules: to snapshot and preserve human culture.

Besides artifacts and other texts, overseers included a document gracefully titled *Book of Record of the Time Capsule of Cupaloy*. This entombed tome imparts the standard well wishes, information about the contents, and a primer on what the fuck English is.

While describing its items, they include a token section on women that I must quote in full:

>Believing, as have the people of each age, that our women are the most beautiful, most intelligent, and best groomed of all the ages, we have enclosed in the Time Capsule specimens of modern cosmetics, and one of the singular clothing creations of our time, a woman’s hat.

The document mentions women one other time.

This quote succinctly *encapsulates* the state of feminism at the time of writing, 1939. It concretes essentialist femininity, that is biological rather than socially constructed femininity, by claiming that “people of each age” have and always will have the same views of women. The text then lists ideal qualities by importance: beauty, intelligence, and…beauty again? Or perhaps they were implying “hygiene?” It makes sense that this definition of womanhood led the capsule team to include the makeup and hat (probably a fascinator) in the capsule as mementos for 70<sup>th</sup> century citizens to remember our “groomed” women by.<sup>[19](#)</sup>

This concern isn’t just mine. Rose Arnold Powell was a former government employee turned feminist advocate during the capsule’s creation.<sup>[8](#)</sup> Along with her dream of getting Susan B. Anthony on Mount Rushmore, she also had a word or two for the men working on this capsule.

>PRESS NOTICE REVEALS THAT NO WOMAN HAS BEEN ASKED TO MAKE STATEMENT OF CIVILIZATION OF OUR DAY TO BE ENCLOSED IN YOUR TIME CAPSULE…MEN AND WOMEN TOGETHER PRODUCED OUR CIVILIZATION

Her telegram was too late; the capsule was sealed.

Project Coordinator George E. Pendray felt at least a shred of remorse, creating a last-minute handwritten list aptly titled “Things feminine in Capsule” to archive in the project files. It included *Gone With the Wind*, “women’s exploits told in World Almanacs,” and “several food tracts by women.”<sup>[12](#)</sup> Not even sure what that last one means. Either way, he relegated women to the back of a napkin.

### Discussion

#### Sexist Futurology

On the surface, it’s obvious why time capsules are sexist: because our society and culture are, duh. This is true. But it’s not the entire story.

Future studies is, as the name suggests, the critical study of the future. This discipline is interdisciplinary and involves everything under the sun, including the sun itself. It’s partly forecasting, but also a critical analysis of where we see ourselves going as of now.<sup>[6](#)</sup>

Like almost every other field in recent history, future studies has always been male-dominated. Again, not surprising. But despite its patriarchal structure, we view future studies’ values and predictions as objective and genderless. We take them so seriously because, in an attempt to transform futurology into a respectable discipline, futurologists worked to rebrand themselves in the ’60s from fortune tellers to scientists.

Madeline Ashby, a futurist who has worked for major organizations like Intel Labs, states that the most popular limitation she observes from male futurists is their prescription of technology as a social panacea. The average futurologist, the white man, has experienced more privilege than the average woman. Thus, they tend to have a more optimistic view of society’s future because “when [they] talk about the future [they] don’t get rape threats.” They become excited over the proposed benefits of “smart bras, “talking kitchen worktops,” and “augmented-reality bedroom mirrors” without mentioning the role of women in society or discussing how to reduce social, physical, and environmental violence perpetrated by men.<sup>[16](#)</sup>

This mentality leads most futurologists to prophesy an optimistic future brought to you by novel technologies. The most amusing examples of this are mid-century films depicting homes and offices of the future.<sup>[e.g., 7](#)</sup> These videos reflect the rigid gender roles of the time: women are secretaries, men occupy the executive suite, women manipulate the microwave for lunch, men pay for it later at their console. Life is more comfortable but just as oppressive for women. The more things change, the more they stay the same.

#### Why should we care?
Time capsules attempt to reflect the whole of humanity. But they end up a snapshot of a society, reflecting the ruling parties’ values and interests, the ones with the means to create the capsules. Instead of being noble, representative markers of our humanity and achievement that their creators intend, time capsules end up perpetuating and entombing tired conventions.

Time capsules are not for aliens, nor our future selves. They are an attempt to create monuments of which we can be proud of in the present. But for that mission to succeed, to create a representative snapshot of humanity or even of a particular culture, the time capsule project must be a project of the community.

#### Epilogue - Time Capsule Expo '70

Time Capsule Expo ’70 is a capsule created for burial at the site of the 1970 World’s Fair held in Osaka, Japan. This capsule is also in it for the long haul: its 2,098 items are set to be unveiled in 6970.

Of course, numerous experts in the sciences, social sciences, and arts contributed ideas for the capsule’s contents and ultimately had the final say. But this team did something unlike any of the previous capsule committees: they consulted the public. They received 116,324 responses, some weird (an appendix, for example), but many quite normal. In the end, the committee included 36 public suggestions, including:

 - films of endangered species
 - a gastrocamera
 - a jack-in-the-box
 - and children’s paintings from around the world<sup>[15](3)</sup>

This time capsule wasn’t perfect, but a step in the right direction for future encapsulation efforts. The more diversely we construct our teams and the more widespread our outreach, the more we combat issues like racism, xenophobia, and, yes, sexism. The broader we are, the more we prevent the future of men and champion the future of all.

The people surveyed for this capsule chose a varied and compelling set of objects, anyway. Interesting how representation works like that.
